Added "four-line" proposal for units of literals (#3266)
modelica/ModelicaSpecification: chapters/lexicalstructure.tex

\end{lstlisting}
\end{nonnormative}

\subsection{Units of Literal Constants}\label{units-literal-constants}

> Literal \lstinline!Real! and \lstinline!Integer! constants are implicitly assumed to have \lstinline!unit = "1"! if they appear in expressions containing variables, parameters, or constants that have a non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string.

Reviewer: I am skeptical about the vagueness of _if they appear in expressions containing variables_.  For example, the way I read it would cause a unit error in the function call here:
```
model FunCall
  function f
    input Real u(unit = "m");
    output Real y(unit = "m") = u;
  end f;

  Real x(unit = "m") = 1.0;
  Real y(unit = "m") = x + f(2.0);
end FunCall;
```
Here, `x + f(1.0)` is an expression involving a variable with non-empty `unit`, and hence `2.0` would get the unit `"1"` which is not compatible with `f`.

Author: That's a good point. It was fairly obvious to me that function calls act like "shields", and what matters is the unit of the function's output, not the unit of the function input expression; on the other hand, one should handle Real literals in expressions passed as function inputs in the same way. But I agree that normative text should be precise and not require  interpretation, which is ambiguous by definition.

We could write something like this:

> Literal `Real` and `Integer` constants are implicitly assumed to have `unit = "1"` if they appear in expressions containing variables, parameters, and constants that have a non-empty `unit` attribute string, or function calls that have a non-empty `unit` attribute of the output variable. The same rule applies to function call inputs.

In fact, if we want to be consistent with Hans's previous advice on transcendental functions inputs and outputs, we could write
> Literal `Real` and `Integer` constants are implicitly assumed to have _a dimensionless unit_ if they appear in expressions containing variables, parameters, and constants that have a non-empty `unit` attribute string, or function calls that have a non-empty `unit` attribute of the output variable. The same rule applies to function call inputs.

Shall I commit the second variant?

Author: See below for a commit-ready suggestion

Reviewer 2: > That's a good point. It was fairly obvious to me that function calls act like "shields", and what matters is the unit of the function's output, not the unit of the function input expression; on the other hand, one should handle Real literals in expressions passed as function inputs in the same way. 

I think this can be resolved by thinking about the parse tree of expressions. I think what Francesco meant with "appear"
> if they appear in expressions containing...

is *if they are an immediate child of expressions containing...*

When walking up the tree of expression, an expression only "sees" its immediate children. 
In the case of the "shielding" function, the function call of `f` is a separate node in the tree: Its only child is its argument, so we need to define how a function call reconciles a real/int argument with a unitful parameter.
Then, for the purposes of the expression `x + f(2.0);`, its children are `x` (unit "m"), and the _output_ of `f` (unit "m"), so everything works out. :-)

Reviewer 2: The `2.0` in `f(2.0)` gets unit `""`, so the function call is OK, as intended. 
However, in the case of 
```modelica
model FunCall2
  function g
    input Real u1(unit = "m");
    input Real u2(unit = "m");
    output Real y(unit = "m") = u1 + u2;
  end g;

  Real x(unit = "m") = 1.0;
  Real y(unit = "m") = f(2.0, x);
end FunCall;
```
we run into a problem in `f(2.0, x)`: As `x` is a *variable that has a non-empty unit attribute string*, in this expression `2.0` is a literal Real constant that appears in an expression with a variable that has a non-empty unit attribute string, so `2.0` will get a unit of "1", which clashes with the unit of `g`'s input argument `u1` ("m").

So, "appear" seems still not precise enough. Right now I don't have a better proposal, maybe someone else?

Reviewer 2: I think with the new approach to formulation, this conversation can be resolved, because we don't use the "appear" formulation anymore.

> Literal \lstinline!Real! and \lstinline!Integer! constants are implicitly assumed to have \lstinline!unit = "1"! if they appear in expressions containing variables, parameters, or constants that have a non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string.

Author: ```suggestion
Literal \lstinline!Real! and \lstinline!Integer! constants are implicitly assumed to have a dimensionless unit if they appear in expressions containing variables, parameters, or constants that have a non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string, or function calls that have a non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute of the output variable. The same rule applies to function call inputs.
```

Author: Here I followed Hans's suggestion to use "dimensionless unit" as in built-in functions also in the rule about expressions. I also expanded the text to clarify how to deal with function calls in expressions.

Reviewer 3: Seems ok.

> - The result of `x + L`, `L + x`, `x - L`, `L - x`, `x*L`, `L*x`, `x/L`, where `x` is a variable with non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string `<s>` and `L` is an expression containing only literal constants, shall have the same \lstinline!unit! attribute string of `x`.

Reviewer 4: Just to reiterate the previous discussion. Including, `x*L` and `L*x` here means that the following is valid, as @henrikt-ma  pointed out:
```
Real x(unit = "m") = 1;
Real y(unit = "m2") = x * 10^2; /* OK, due to wildcard effect of 10^2. */
```

Reviewer 2: AIUI, this is accounted for by the definition that
> `L` is an _expression_ containing only literal constants

`10^2` is an expression containing only literal constants (at least, if you consider the operators in an expression not to count -- maybe better would be "`L` is an _expression_ operating only on literal constants).

Reviewer 2: To avoid having to keep in mind/memory the whole expression tree below a given leaf to be able to make the right decision (which could be complicated/expensive), maybe we can specify that the unitness of an expression that operates purely on literal constants is equivalent to a literal constant (with some edge cases, surely).

Initial proposal for an additional rule:
```
- The result of mathematical operations *(precise scope TBD)* purely on literal constants does not have a defined, non-empty \lstinline!unit! string attribute. (Non-normative addition: they behave just like literal constants themselves with respect to unit handling)
```

WIP scope of "mathematical operations" (help me refine, pls)
* Elementary mathematical functions (3.7.3)
* Arithmetic operators (3.4)

Reviewer: > Thoughts?

The two proposals differ substantially in how far they take unit checkin, but with the recent development of this one I don't really see a reason why the two proposals couldn't both do it in the "standard" recursive bottom-up fashion.
I'm ready to port any refinements in this PR over what is currently in #3257, so that get get this detail out of the way when comparing the proposals.

Reviewer 4: > AIUI, this is accounted for by the definition that
> 
> > `L` is an _expression_ containing only literal constants
> 
> `10^2` is an expression containing only literal constants (at least, if you consider the operators in an expression not to count -- maybe better would be "`L` is an _expression_ **operating only on** literal constants).

I don't understand how what you are saying relates to my comment.

My interpretation of the current wording is that `10^2` would receive the same unit as `x`, in the example above that would be `m` which would make it valid. I would prefer if our specs could reject the given example.

Author: > AIUI, this is accounted for by the definition that
> 
> > `L` is an _expression_ containing only literal constants

Yes. This is not clearly explained in the text committed on this PR branch.

> `10^2` is an expression containing only literal constants (at least, if you consider the operators in an expression not to count -- maybe better would be "`L` is an _expression_ **operating only on** literal constants).

I'm not sure if the Modelica specification itself has rigorous definitions of terms such as _expression operating on something_. I only found one [here](https://specification.modelica.org/maint/3.5/arrays.html), the problem is it clearly refers to expressions where operators are used. As I wrote in a previous comment, I see no reason why we shouldn't also include function calls (both proper functions and function-like operators alike). So, maybe "containing only literal constants" is clear enough for that?

Reviewer 3: The problem with functions is that many functions have units in the interface, e.g. `specificEnthalphy_pT(1e5, 293.15)` which clearly shouldn't be treated as if it were only literal constants.

The interesting part with `sin` is that `Modelica.Math.sin` similarly has unit in the interface - and it would be nice if both were treated the same.

Author: > To avoid having to keep in mind/memory the whole expression tree below a given leaf to be able to make the right decision (which could be complicated/expensive),

The proposed text does not imply that. This is an implementation detail. As I understand, there is no need to keep the whole tree in memory, you just need to carry the information about sub-expressions only involving literals with undefined units as you process the expression tree.

> - The result of mathematical operations *(precise scope TBD)* where all operands have either undefined or empty  \lstinline!unit! string attribute has an empty \lstinline!unit! string attribute. 

Wait: undefined unit (i.e. literal) is not the same as empty unit string (e.g. Real variable or parameter). We are only concerned about literals with undefined unit in this proposal.

> Then, we can replace "L is an expression containing only literal constants" with "L has undefined or empty unit string", 

Only undefined. If it is empty, then it is correct to consider it as wildcard. Anyway, I wouldn't go down this rabbit hole. If you want to do something more than what I proposed here, then it's best to work on the other proposal, which is a lot more ambitious.

More in general, I would try not to overkill over such a tiny issue 😅 .

Author: > My interpretation of the current wording is that `10^2` would receive the same unit as `x`, in the example above that would be `m` which would make it valid. I would prefer if our specs could reject the given example.

The current wording implies that `x*10^2` and `10^2*x` get the same unit as `x`. It's the result of the multiplication or addition that retains the unit, not the literal constant taking any unit.

Reviewer 4: > > My interpretation of the current wording is that `10^2` would receive the same unit as `x`, in the example above that would be `m` which would make it valid. I would prefer if our specs could reject the given example.
> 
> The current wording implies that `x*10^2` and `10^2*x` get the same unit as `x`. It's the result of the multiplication or addition that retains the unit, not the literal constant taking any unit.

I see

Author: > We would however be rejecting the following

See below.

> Real x1(unit = "m") = 1;

The RHS has undefined unit, so there is no reason why this should be rejected. No dimensional inconsistency can be detected between a length and a quantity with undefined unit. Do I miss something?

> Real x2(unit = "s") = 2

Ditto.

> Real y(unit = "m/s") = (x1/x2) * 10^2; /* Rejected because 10^2 will receive "m/s". */

`x1/x2` has unit "1". Hence `x1/x2*10^2` will retain the same unit, causing a rejection because you have "m/s" on the LHS and "1" on the RHS. This is consistent with my requirements: since there are quantities with non-empty unit strings x1 and x2, 10^2 should behave as a dimensionless constant, not as a dimensional wildcard.

Thinking about it, we should probably improve the wording of the basic rules from "where `x` is a variable with non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string `<s>`" to "where `x` is an expression with non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string `<s>`". I'll update the PR accordingly.

Author: Done.

Reviewer 2: > The proposed text does not imply that. This is an implementation detail. As I understand, there is no need to keep the whole tree in memory, you just need to carry the information about sub-expressions only involving literals with undefined units as you process the expression tree.

Ah, interesting context! I failed to consider that implementations could separately/on their own track if subexpressions only involved literals even _without_ support for this in the spec. Hence my intention to specify that.

In that case, I think we can forget about the concern about propagating "literal-onlyness" upwards.

Reviewer 2: > `x1/x2` has unit "1".

I think you got mixed up -- `x1/x2` has units "m" / "s".

Author: OK, you are right, then it will be accepted, as far as I understand - multiplying an expression with unit "m/s" by a unit-less literal keeps the same unit.

Reviewer 2: AFAICT, the sole remaining issue to resolve in this conversation thread is how to deal with calls of functions with units in their interface.

Francesco:
> As I wrote in a previous comment, I see no reason why we shouldn't also include function calls (both proper functions and function-like operators alike). So, maybe "containing only literal constants" is clear enough for that?

Hans:
> The problem with functions is that many functions have units in the interface, e.g. `specificEnthalphy_pT(1e5, 293.15)` which clearly shouldn't be treated as if it were only literal constants.
> 
> The interesting part with `sin` is that `Modelica.Math.sin` similarly has unit in the interface - and it would be nice if both were treated the same.

Author: For proper functions, the rules that we have specified for handling the units of expressions containing literals should apply. Say that specificEnthalpy_pT(p,T) wants an input p with unit "Pa" and an input T with unit "K", and that we have defined variables p and T with such units, and h with unit "J/kg".
- specificEnthalpy_pT(p, T) is accepted, because the input expressions have a well-defined unit, which is the right one
- specificEnthalpy_pT(p, h) is rejected, because the second input has a well-defined unit, which is different from what is expected
- specificEnthalpy_pT(2*p, T) is accepted, because 2*p has the same unit of p, i.e. "Pa"
- specificEnthalpy_pT(p, T+2) is accepted, because T+2 has the same unit of T, i.e. "K"
- specificEnthalpy_pT(p, h/1000) is rejected, because h/1000 keeps the unit of h, i.e. "J/kg"
- specificEnthalpy_pT(1e5, 293.15) is accepted, because the inputs have no units information, so you can't say if they are dimensionally inconsistent
- specificEnthalpy_pT(1e5, 293.15 + time*20) is rejected, because the second input has unit "s" instead of "K"
- h + specificEnthalpy_pT(p,T) is accepted because it sums two quantities with unit "J/kg"
- h + specificEnthalpy_pT(1e5, 293.15) is accepted because it sums two quantities with unit "J/kg"
- T + specificEnthalpy_pT(p,T) is rejected because is sums a quantity with unit "K" and a quantity with unit "J/kg".
- 1e3 + specificEnthalpy_pT(p,T) is accepted because L + x has the same unit of x, i.e., "J/kg"

From this point of view, I don't think we need to say anything specific about regular functions, what to do with them when doing dimensional consistency checking is obvious: if you have defined unit information, use it for checking, otherwise don't do anything.

The reason built-in functions are mentioned explicitly is that they _don't have unit information defined anywhere_. With the current formulation of the rules, maybe the most appropriate place to say that is not here, but rather [section 3.7.3](https://specification.modelica.org/master/operators-and-expressions.html#built-in-mathematical-functions-and-external-built-in-functions). What do you think?

Reviewer 2: NB: It's not sufficient to restrict our rule application to `arithmetic-expression` instead of "expression", because according to the grammar (Spec A.2.7), the function call syntax is part of the `primary` token, so `specificEnthalpy_pT(1e5, 293.15)` is an `arithmetic-expression` if I read the grammar correctly.

Author: @bilderbuchi good point. I assume we all agree that the expected results I posted in my [previous comment](https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/pull/3266#discussion_r1022592658) are OK. It shows that "expression containing only literal constants" is a bit sloppy and simply not good enough.

The important point here is that expressions are built using operators, function-like operators and regular function. For some of them, how units must be handled is pretty obvious, e.g. in a + b, a*b, a/b, sqrt(b), smooth(0, expr), fill(expr, n, m) and, most importantly, _the unit of the result depends on the units of the operands / function inputs_. All these functions should be considered in the same way as operators such as `+` or `*`.

Then, there are functions such as specificEnthalpy_pT(), where instead the unit of the output is actually declared in the function itself, so _it does not (and should not)_ depend on the unit of the inputs. These need to be handled in a completely differnt way. In fact, these functions act as watersheds for unit checking: you should separately check that their inputs are fine (i.e., if they have a defined, non-empty unit, it has to be the right one), and then their output can be considered as a variable with the unit of their output.

We need a way to tell these two categories apart and properly convey this context. At the moment, I'm not really sure how to do that in a concise way. Maybe you can make a proposal for that.

Reviewer 2: Agreed on all points.

> Maybe you can make a proposal for that.

My best shot so far has been the approach proposed [above](https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/pull/3266#discussion_r1018756734), i.e. to define the unitness of the result of purely-literal (or empty-unit) operations, and use that newly gained definition in the present operation rules for mixed-unitness operands. 
This would liberate us from having to distinguish between the two categories you mention, as now for all operands we have well-defined unitness, and unit checking can follow the expression tree.

I'd be happy to iterate more on this approach, but you considered this out of scope (as it's not concerned only with literals anymore), and too ambitious, so I did not follow up further. Should I pick this up again and give it another go?

Author: @bilderbuchi yes, that was the idea. ""L is an expression containing only literal constants" is really weak.

However, I'm not sure what you proposed [above](https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/pull/3266#discussion_r1018756734) is OK. You wrote "L has undefined or empty unit string", but allowing empty strings promotes them to the same level of "dimensionless literals" (which are not explicitly defined, but you get the idea). This may lead to undesirable side effects, e.g.:
```
Real L = 1;
Real A(unit="m2") = 2;
Real V(unit="m3") = A*L;
```
here `L` has empty unit string, so `A*L` will be considered to have unit "m2", and then the third binding equation would be rejected.

The goal of this PR is just to avoid the unit wildcard effect of literal units (that have undefined unit string), without introducing non-backwards compatible changes to unit checking. If one mixes _variables_ with and without units, the tool should just give up dimensional consistency checking. As I understand, your [last proposal](https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/pull/3266#discussion_r1018756734) doesn't really achieve that.

Reviewer 2: > allowing empty strings promotes them to the same level of "dimensionless literals"

Indeed. My intent was to "unify" behaviour for "unitless" (undefined or empty) objects. Maybe I had a wrong picture of what "proper" behaviour is.

_Please disregard the question if it fits in this proposal or not for a moment_. 
If I understand your remark on undesirable side-effects correctly, you want *variables* with empty unit string to *retain* a wildcard effect, so the equation for `V` should be accepted althought it has m3 on the left and m2*number on the right. Correct?

My view was that having a `Real L = 2` with empty unit string is *effectively* just a label/_reference_ for a string literal (for which we want to avoid wildcard behaviour). So, I thought that empty-unit variables and undefined-unit literals should effectively behave the same, which would mean that the equation for `V` should be rejected like the one for `V2`.
```
Real L = 1;
Real A(unit="m2") = 2;
Real V(unit="m3") = A*L; // you want this accepted (L is a wildcard)?
Real V2(unit="m3") = A*2; // should be rejected (m3 != m2)
```

I'm fully in the clear about your desire to absolutely minimize the scope of this proposal to increase its chances of being accepted, and I agree with you! 
However, we now seem to have hit a point where we can't find a watertight formulation for how to specify our intent. This _alone_ prompted me to pick up the previous proposal, to see if we can salvage something from it. Maybe a small extension of the scope will lead to a better-expressible specification, and reach agreement or at least discussion?

Let me know your thoughts, and I'll iterate more on it.

Author: > Indeed. My intent was to "unify" behaviour for "unitless" (undefined or empty) objects. Maybe I had a wrong picture of what "proper" behaviour is.
> 
> _Please disregard the question if it fits in this proposal or not for a moment_.

Motion of order: if you want to discuss another proposal, please start another PR 😃 . This discussion is way too long already.

The goal of this PR is to avoid the wildcard effect of literal constants, avoiding any kind of semantic change that causes existing code (which is not plain wrong or highly questionable, of course) to be rejected by dimensional checking. So, to me the proper behaviour is that if `A` has unit "m2" and L has unit "", `2*A` must have unit "m2", while it won't be possible to say anything about the unit of `A*L`, because L has an empty unit string.

People have been writing code with non fully specified units for ages. Sometimes for good reasons, e.g. when we wrote fluid models with weird partial derivatives, we didn't bother to specify their units in detail, because that was boring and we may have actually made mistakes while doing that, creating bogus dimensional checking errors. So, we left them with unit = "". It is not compulsory to use units in Modelica, by any means, so by no means variables with unit = "" should be interpreted as if they were dimensionless. This has never been the intention.

> If I understand your remark on undesirable side-effects correctly, you want _variables_ with empty unit string to _retain_ a wildcard effect

Yes.

> so the equation for `V` should be accepted although it has m3 on the left and m2*number on the right. Correct?

Yes. Otherwise we break backwards compatibility badly.
 
> My view was that having a `Real L = 2` with empty unit string is _effectively_ just a label/_reference_ for a string literal

No, it's not. This is the whole point of this proposal: a literal unit used in an expression _is not the same_ as a variable with empty unit attribute, which is de-facto how it is interpreted by today's tools. Regardless of how it has been defined/computed.

> So, I thought that empty-unit variables and undefined-unit literals should effectively behave the same, which would mean that the equation for `V` should be rejected like the one for `V2`.

No. If we reject the equation for `V`, I bet there will be hundreds of cases in the MSL that will be rejected, beyond the Spice library which is a bit special because it's a straight porting from FORTRAN code. That's not what I want with this PR. And I guess @HansOlsson will be even more opposed to it 😅.

> I'm fully in the clear about your desire to absolutely minimize the scope of this proposal to increase its chances of being accepted, and I agree with you! However, we now seem to have hit an impasse, where we cannot find a watertight formulation for how to specify our intent.

I am sure we can find a better formulation for that with a bit of patience, _without changing the scope of the proposal_. The case of expressions involving literal constants and mathematical operators is pretty clear. We just need to define how to handle function calls and function-like operators. The idea is explained in a bit loose terms in my [previous comment](https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/pull/3266#discussion_r1023048775). We just need to make it shorter and as formal as possible.

If you want something stronger, that would a different PR, and maybe you should consider the alternative proposal by @henrikt-ma first 😃.

Author: 😄

Reviewer 2: I have an updated proposal, see the separate thread https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/pull/3266/files#r1049500278 (for a better viewing experience, this one is huge).

> - The result of `x + L`, `L + x`, `x - L`, `L - x`, `x*L`, `L*x`, `x/L`, where `x` is an expression with non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string `<s>` and `L` is an expression containing only literal constants, shall have the same \lstinline!unit! attribute string of `x`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The result of \lstinline!x + L!, \lstinline!L + x!, \lstinline!x - L!, \lstinline!L - x!, \lstinline!x*L!, \lstinline!L*x!, \lstinline!x/L!, where \lstinline!x! is an expression with non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string `<s>` and \lstinline!L! is an expression containing only literal constants, shall have the same \lstinline!unit! attribute string of \lstinline!x!.
```
Use inline Modelica code consistently. I don't think the other variant looks as good.

> Literal \lstinline!Real! and \lstinline!Integer! constants are implicitly assumed to have a dimensionless unit if they appear in expressions containing variables, parameters, or constants that have a non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string, or function calls that have a non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute of the output variable. The same rule applies to function call inputs.

Author: ```suggestion
The following rules apply:
- The result of `x + L`, `L + x`, `x - L`, `L - x`, `x*L`, `L*x`, `x/L`, where `x` is a variable with non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string `<s>` and `L` is a literal constant, shall have the same \lstinline!unit! attribute string of `x`.
- The result of `L/x` shall the the \lstinline!unit! attribute string `1/(<s>)`. 
- The result of `x^L` shall have the \lstinline!unit! attribute string of `product(fill(x, L))` if L is a positive Integer, or the unit of `1/product(fill(x, L))` if L is a negative Integer
- If either side of a relational operator is a literal constant, then it is assumed to have the same \lstinline!unit! attribute string of the other side, if that is well-defined.
```

Author: Rewrote first part based on the results of the discussion so far

Reviewer 4: Sorry, I had another look at Henrik examples. The first item in the list says that in the case of `x * L`, "`L` shall have the same unit attribute as `x`", which does mean that:
 ```
Real x(unit = "m") = 1;
Real y(unit = "m2") = x * 10^2; /* OK, due to wildcard effect of 10^2. */
 ```

Reviewer 2: Ha, well spotted! 
The addition should probably get a separate item.

Author: Updated the text based on @qlambert-pro's suggestion.

> - The result of `L/x` shall the the \lstinline!unit! attribute string `1/(<s>)`. 

Reviewer 2: "...shall *have* the...". Also, there's a trailing whitespace that sems to trip up the build server.

Author: Thanks for spotting that!

> - The result of `L/x` shall the the \lstinline!unit! attribute string `1/(<s>)`. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The result of `L/x` shall the the \lstinline!unit! attribute string `1/(<s>)`.
```
Remove trailing white-space

> The inputs of transcendental built-in functions such as \lstinline!sin()!, \lstinline!cos()!, \lstinline!exp()!, etc., should have a dimensionless unit (e.g., \lstinline!"1"| or \lstinline!"rad"!) if they involve expressions containing variables, parameters, or constants that have a non-empty unit attribute string.

Reviewer: Typo:
```suggestion
The inputs of transcendental built-in functions such as \lstinline!sin()!, \lstinline!cos()!, \lstinline!exp()!, etc., should have a dimensionless unit (e.g., \lstinline!"1"! or \lstinline!"rad"!) if they involve expressions containing variables, parameters, or constants that have a non-empty unit attribute string.
```

> The inputs of transcendental built-in functions such as \lstinline!sin()!, \lstinline!cos()!, \lstinline!exp()!, etc., should have a dimensionless unit (e.g., \lstinline!"1"! or \lstinline!"rad"!) if they involve expressions containing variables, parameters, or constants that have a non-empty unit attribute string.

Author: ```suggestion
The inputs of the elementary mathematical functions defined in \cref{built-in-mathematical-functions-and-external-built-in-functions} such as \lstinline!sin()!, \lstinline!cos()!, \lstinline!exp()!, etc., should have a dimensionless unit (e.g., \lstinline!"1"! or \lstinline!"rad"!) if they involve expressions containing variables, parameters, or constants that have a non-empty unit attribute string, or function calls with an output variable having non-empty unit attribute string. Function \lstinline!atan2(y,x)! should be treated as  \lstinline!atan(x/y)! for dimensional consistency checking purposes.
```

Author: I updated this sentence based on a number of previous comments in a now-resolved review. I also added an explicit reference to the place where the transcendental built-in functions were called, and now used their proper name "elementaty mathematical functions" according to the MLS.

Author: Agreed, I updated the change.

> - The result of `x^L` shall have the \lstinline!unit! attribute string of `product(fill(x, L))` if L is a positive Integer, or the unit of `1/product(fill(x, L))` if L is a negative Integer

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The result of \lstinline!x^L! shall have the \lstinline!unit! attribute string of \lstinline!product(fill(x, L))! if L is a positive Integer, or the unit of \lstinline!1/product(fill(x, L))! if L is a negative Integer
```
The other option would be $x^L$ or something similar, but the current variant doesn't work.

Reviewer 3: To discuss, if we use this variant we should use it more consistently.

Author: LGTM

Author: Looks like it's done already in the PR

> Their outputs are implicitly assumed to have unit \lstinline!"1"! if they are called within expressions containing variables, parameters, or constants that have a non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Their outputs are also implicitly assumed to have a dimensionless unit if they are called within expressions containing variables, parameters, or constants that have a non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string.
```
This makes it symmetric for input and output, without spending more text on it - so handling asin as inverse of sin.

Author: Sounds good. It is up to the tool implementors to figure out how to handle this.

> Their outputs are also implicitly assumed to have a dimensionless unit if they are called within expressions containing variables, parameters, or constants that have a non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string.

Author: ```suggestion
In that case, their outputs are also implicitly assumed to have a dimensionless unit.
```

Author: I guess this makes more sense in the new formulation

- If either side of a relational operator is a literal constant, then it is assumed to have the same \lstinline!unit! attribute string of the other side, if that is well-defined.

> The inputs of the elementary mathematical functions defined in \cref{built-in-mathematical-functions-and-external-built-in-functions} such as \lstinline!sin()!, \lstinline!cos()!, \lstinline!exp()!, etc., should have a dimensionless unit (e.g., \lstinline!"1"! or \lstinline!"rad"!) if the unit string of the input is non-empty. Function \lstinline!atan2(y,x)! should be treated as  \lstinline!atan(x/y)! for dimensional consistency checking purposes.

Reviewer 2: "...if the unit string of the input *parameter* is non-empty." to avoid confusing this with the "input" mentioned in the second word of this sentence.

> Rationale: unit attributes allow to check dimensional consistency of expressions and equations, as long as all the involved terms have a non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute.

Author: ```suggestion
Rationale: by default, literal Real and Integer constants do not have a defined, non-empty \lstinline!unit! string attribute; hence they act as "unit wildcards", preventing to perform dimensional consistency checking of equations that contain them. The rules regarding multiplication and division prevent this effect, allowing, e.g., to determine that `v = sqrt(2*g*h)` is dimensionally consistent, while `v = sqrt(2*g)` is dimensionally inconsistent, and thus most likely wrong. The rules regarding addition and subtraction instead allow to perform some basic unit inference in expressions containing mixed literal constants and variables (when there are no ambiguities in doing so), again expanding the scope for dimensional consistency checking. For example, they allow to determine that `tau = L/(abs(v) + 1e-9)` is dimensionally consistent, while `tau = 1/(abs(v) + 1e-9)` is not.]_
```

Author: Rewrote rationale to be consistent with newly formulated rules

> Non-dimensional literal factors, e.g., \lstinline!2! in \lstinline!v = sqrt(2*g*h)! in physical laws involving quantities with units are always meant to be dimensionless, so they should be considered as such by giving them \lstinline!unit = "1"!.

Author: ```suggestion
```
Removed text

> This allows to find out that, e.g., \lstinline!v = sqrt(2*h)! is dimensionally inconsistent (hence most likely wrong), because it has unit \lstinline!"m/s"! on the left-hand side and unit \lstinline!"m0.5"! on the right-hand side, which are not consistent.

Author: ```suggestion
```
Remove text

> Without this rule, \lstinline!2! would have the default \lstinline!unit = ""! of \lstinline!Real!, making it impossible to determine the right-hand side unit.

Author: ```suggestion
```
Removed text.

> Rationale: by default, literal Real and Integer constants do not have a defined, non-empty \lstinline!unit! string attribute; hence they act as "unit wildcards", preventing to perform dimensional consistency checking of equations that contain them. The rules regarding multiplication and division prevent this effect, allowing, e.g., to determine that `v = sqrt(2*g*h)` is dimensionally consistent, while `v = sqrt(2*g)` is dimensionally inconsistent, and thus most likely wrong. The rules regarding addition and subtraction instead allow to perform some basic unit inference in expressions containing mixed literal constants and variables (when there are no ambiguities in doing so), again expanding the scope for dimensional consistency checking. For example, they allow to determine that `tau = L/(abs(v) + 1e-9)` is dimensionally consistent, while `tau = 1/(abs(v) + 1e-9)` is not.]_

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: "..., preventing ~~to perform~~ dimensional consistency checking..."

Author: Done

> Rationale: by default, literal Real and Integer constants do not have a defined, non-empty \lstinline!unit! string attribute; hence they act as "unit wildcards", preventing dimensional consistency checking of equations that contain them. The rules regarding multiplication and division prevent this effect, allowing, e.g., to determine that `v = sqrt(2*g*h)` is dimensionally consistent, while `v = sqrt(2*g)` is dimensionally inconsistent, and thus most likely wrong. The rules regarding addition and subtraction instead allow to perform some basic unit inference in expressions containing mixed literal constants and variables (when there are no ambiguities in doing so), again expanding the scope for dimensional consistency checking. For example, they allow to determine that `tau = L/(abs(v) + 1e-9)` is dimensionally consistent, while `tau = 1/(abs(v) + 1e-9)` is not.]_

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Rationale: by default, literal Real and Integer constants do not have a defined, non-empty \lstinline!unit! string attribute; hence they act as "unit wildcards", preventing dimensional consistency checking of equations that contain them.
The rules regarding multiplication and division prevent this effect, allowing, e.g., to determine that \lstinline!v = sqrt(2*g*h)! is dimensionally consistent, while \lstinline!v = sqrt(2*g)! is dimensionally inconsistent, and thus most likely wrong.
The rules regarding addition and subtraction instead allow to perform some basic unit inference in expressions containing mixed literal constants and variables (when there are no ambiguities in doing so), again expanding the scope for dimensional consistency checking.
For example, they allow to determine that \lstinline!tau = L/(abs(v) + 1e-9)! is dimensionally consistent, while \lstinline!tau = 1/(abs(v) + 1e-9)! is not.]
```
Similar cleanup.

On the other hand, literal constants showing up in expressions containing only literal constants should be left with the default \lstinline!unit = ""! attribute, otherwise declarations such as \lstinline!Real L(unit = "m") = 2.0!, equations such as \lstinline!L = 2.0! and function calls such as \lstinline!temperature_ph(1e5, 293.15)! or \lstinline!temperature_ph(1e5, 273.15 + 20)! would be erroneously flagged as dimensionally inconsistent.

> The rules involving built-in transcendental functions extend the scope of this concept to also allow determining that equations such as \lstinline!i = i0*exp(v/i0)! or \lstinline!i = v0*exp(i/i0)! are dimensionally inconsistent.

Reviewer 2: "elementary mathematical" instead of "transcendental", to mirror the [above](https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/pull/3266/files#r1007433021) change, right?

Author: Absolutely :)

Author: Fixed below

> The rules involving built-in transcendental functions extend the scope of this concept to also allow determining that equations such as \lstinline!i = i0*exp(v/i0)! or \lstinline!i = v0*exp(i/i0)! are dimensionally inconsistent.

Author: ```suggestion
The rules involving elementary mathematical functions extend the scope of this concept to also allow determining that equations such as \lstinline!i = i0*exp(v/i0)! or \lstinline!i = v0*exp(i/i0)! are dimensionally inconsistent.
```

> On the other hand, literal constants showing up in expressions containing only literal constants should be left with the default \lstinline!unit = ""! attribute, otherwise declarations such as \lstinline!Real L(unit = "m") = 2.0!, equations such as \lstinline!L = 2.0! and function calls such as \lstinline!temperature_ph(1e5, 293.15)! or \lstinline!temperature_ph(1e5, 273.15 + 20)! would be erroneously flagged as dimensionally inconsistent.

Author: ```suggestion
```
Removed text

\end{lstlisting}
\end{nonnormative}

\subsection{Units of Literal Constants}\label{units-literal-constants}

The following rules apply:
- The result of `x + L`, `L + x`, `x - L`, `L - x`, `x*L`, `L*x`, `x/L`, where `x` is an expression with non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string `<s>` and `L` is an expression containing only literal constants, shall have the same \lstinline!unit! attribute string of `x`.

> - The result of `L/x` shall the the \lstinline!unit! attribute string `1/(<s>)`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The result of `L/x` shall have the \lstinline!unit! attribute string `1/(<s>)`.
```

> - The result of `x + L`, `L + x`, `x - L`, `L - x`, `x*L`, `L*x`, `x/L`, where `x` is an expression with non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string `<s>` and `L` is an expression containing only literal constants, shall have the same \lstinline!unit! attribute string of `x`.
> - The result of `L/x` shall have the \lstinline!unit! attribute string `1/(<s>)`.
> - The result of \lstinline!x^L! shall have the \lstinline!unit! attribute string of \lstinline!product(fill(x, L))! if L is a positive Integer, or the unit of \lstinline!1/product(fill(x, L))! if L is a negative Integer
> - If either side of a relational operator is a literal constant, then it is assumed to have the same \lstinline!unit! attribute string of the other side, if that is well-defined.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
\begin{itemize}
\item The result of \lstinline!x + L!, \lstinline!L + x\lstinline!, \lstinline!x - L!, \lstinline!L - x!, \lstinline!x*L!, \lstinline!L*x!, \lstinline!x/L!, where \lstinline!x! is an expression with non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string `<s>` and \lstinline!L! is an expression containing only literal constants, shall have the same \lstinline!unit! attribute string of \lstinline!x!.
\item The result of \lstinline!L/x\lstinline! shall have the \lstinline!unit! attribute string `1/(<s>)`.
\item The result of \lstinline!x^L! shall have the \lstinline!unit! attribute string of \lstinline!product(fill(x, L))! if L is a positive Integer, or the unit of \lstinline!1/product(fill(x, L))! if L is a negative Integer
\item If either side of a relational operator is a literal constant, then it is assumed to have the same \lstinline!unit! attribute string of the other side, if that is well-defined.
\end{itemize}
```
Proper LaTeX-code (except for the `<s>` for unit).

Looking at the generated artefact: https://test.openmodelica.org/jenkins/job/ModelicaAssociation/job/ModelicaSpecification/job/PR-3266/21/artifact/MLS.pdf
I believe this change will make it more readable.

Author: LGTM

Author: In fact, I wrote that part using rST, I forgot I had to use LaTeX

Author: Done

\end{lstlisting}
\end{nonnormative}

\subsection{Units of Literal Constants}\label{units-literal-constants}

The following rules apply:
\begin{itemize}

> \item The result of \lstinline!x + L!, \lstinline!L + x\lstinline!, \lstinline!x - L!, \lstinline!L - x!, \lstinline!x*L!, \lstinline!L*x!, \lstinline!x/L!, where \lstinline!x! is an expression with non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string `<s>` and \lstinline!L! is an expression containing only literal constants, shall have the same \lstinline!unit! attribute string of \lstinline!x!.

Reviewer 2: I have a proposal to resolve the distinction between built-in (`exp()`) and other (`specifiEnthalpy()`) functions. Because there's some context to write up around this, see the gist https://gist.github.com/bilderbuchi/317bc1a2e039f477462a61f5826260ea

I also collected all the test cases I could find so far in one place, so we could cross-check against them (and maybe add to a test suite later):  https://gist.github.com/bilderbuchi/317bc1a2e039f477462a61f5826260ea#file-mcp-0027-test-examples-md

I started a new discussion thread because the previous one grew huge and hard to view.

Reviewer 2: @casella any thoughts on this approach to express the distinction between builtin and other functions?

Reviewer 2: @HansOlsson @henrikt-ma @casella it would be great to get your feedback on my comment https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/pull/3266/files#r1049500278 with a proposed approach to resolve the distinction between built-in (`exp()`) and other (`specificEnthalpy()`) functions, and hopefully make progress on this PR. :-)

Reviewer 3: I believe that built-in functions should be treated uniformly with other functions as much as possible, and we need to distinguish it in some other way. Specifically specificEnthalphy is a function where the interface-variables have non-empty units, and that should be preserved. Note that some built-in functions have unit (specifically for Angles) in Modelica.Math, which is kind of identical to having `unit="1"`. 

So in one sense many built-in functions can be seen as having `unit="1"` meaning that we can limit literal-part to functions where the interface is without unit. However, having an interface for built-in functions will stumble on `abs`, `sign`, `sqrt`, `atan2`, etc where it makes more sense to say that the unit-handling is defined according to the mathematical rules.

Additionally for deriving units it makes sense that each function call is treated separately; so that if a user defined their own abs-function it is possible to have different units for each call. With such a rule we can just exclude function calls from the literal part; as `x+myabs(2)` will be a two-step procedure: `myabs#1.input=2`, `x+myabs#1.output`.

Author: > @HansOlsson @henrikt-ma @casella it would be great to get your feedback on my comment https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/pull/3266/files#r1049500278 with a proposed approach to resolve the distinction between built-in (`exp()`) and other (`specificEnthalpy()`) functions, and hopefully make progress on this PR. :-)

@bilderbuchi I apologize. During the last few months I was overwhelmed by teaching load and other stuff, and I couldn't keep track with this discussion. Now, as I get back to it, I would have to restart from the beginning and go through 100+ comments, in multiple branches and sub-branches. I would need a map to navigate this now, otherwise just getting back on track would require to spend several hours to re-read the whole material. To me, this is hopeless, I'm sorry but I can't handle this now.

I think the only way to get through this is to _physically_ lock a few of us in a room ([Viterbo-style](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1268%E2%80%931271_papal_election)), throw out the key and only let us leave when we have a finished proposal 😅. BTW, this is how we made progress with features such as the stream connectors, back in the old days of yore when we didn't have Zoom and GIT and we met in person during 3-days Modelica Design Meetings do do stuff.

If we could somehow draw a line and restart the discussion clean from a point on which we have some general consensus, that would be great. But I'm not sure such a point even exists. In any case, I'm afraid a PR with 100+ comments is dead, or at least not feeling well.

BTW, I'm not even sure how could I actually _read_ the current proposal. Is there a way to get this branch compiled into html or PDF?

Reviewer 2: No need to say sorry, I recognize your points myself. I understand that a conclave-style workshop would be preferable, but I'm not sure if such an approach is in the cards?

However, IIRC the way it seemed to me at least was that this proposal was near ~consensus (or readyness for review), and most conversation threads concluded.  The main remaining item was I think to resolve the precision/scope of the "expression containing only literal constants" formulation, which I attempted again back in December with this Gist.

Reviewer 2: > BTW, I'm not even sure how could I actually read the current proposal. Is there a way to get this branch compiled into html or PDF?

The CI system compiles a PDF, you have to navigate to the build checks below, on the Jenkins page hit the "ARtifacts" button in the upper right, and download the pdf. In this case, this link: https://test.openmodelica.org/jenkins/job/ModelicaAssociation/job/ModelicaSpecification/job/PR-3266/23/artifact/MLS.pdf
Pretty neat I have to say, hats off to the MA dev that set this up! :-)

Reviewer 2: To summarize the situation hopefully more simply (from my point of view/recollection):
* What we _have_ already reached full consensus on right now is the **desired behaviour** of unit checking while avoiding the "wildcard effect", as codified in the set of unit-test-like examples that I collected from the discussions in one place [here](https://gist.github.com/bilderbuchi/317bc1a2e039f477462a61f5826260ea#file-mcp-0027-test-examples-md)
* _What remains_ is to find out the/a **minimal change to the spec** that corresponds to that desired behaviour.
* Your PR here is an attempt to formulate such a change.
* The _one thing_ your PR does **not yet cover correctly** is the _last_ example in the section https://gist.github.com/bilderbuchi/317bc1a2e039f477462a61f5826260ea#proper-functions (as called out in that section). 
* My [proposal update](https://gist.github.com/bilderbuchi/317bc1a2e039f477462a61f5826260ea#file-mcp-0027-proposal-update-md) BB2a **rectifies this deficiency** AFAICT.
* I'm asking if this proposal BB2a is acceptable in content/principle. If yes, I also ask if the refactored formulation BB2b, that streamlines the whole diff, is agreeable. I consider the second point optional if it turns out to be contentious.

Reviewer: As it was pointed out below in https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/pull/3266#issuecomment-1582197249, the language group is not ready to incorporate a solution to the wildcard effect in isolation.  Instead, it seems that what we have learned in these discussions need to be carried over to a fresh start on unit checking where we try to break down the problem into smaller pieces, and where we in the end will be able to see the complete picture of unit checking before merging anything to the _master_ branch.

Reviewer 2: I missed this recent comment in the notifications/PR discussion.
After a couple of months of mostly productive back-and-forth iteration, and half a year of inactivity, that certainly feels like a disappointing outcome to me. 
One can only hope that, after having failed to achieve sufficient consensus on this minimized-scope problem, making the scope of the problem _larger_ will enable achieving that consensus somehow. This sounds unintuitive to me 😅, but if this is the way this works, hopefully such a holistic perspective will succeed in unblocking things for the language group. 🤞 

I hope that at least the [list of test cases](https://gist.github.com/bilderbuchi/317bc1a2e039f477462a61f5826260ea#file-mcp-0027-test-examples-md) we all came up with together will be useful during these future discussions.

\item The result of \lstinline!L/x\lstinline! shall have the \lstinline!unit! attribute string `1/(<s>)`.
\item The result of \lstinline!x^L! shall have the \lstinline!unit! attribute string of \lstinline!product(fill(x, L))! if L is a positive Integer, or the unit of \lstinline!1/product(fill(x, L))! if L is a negative Integer.

> \item If either side of a relational operator is a literal constant, then it is assumed to have the same \lstinline!unit! attribute string of the other side, if that is well-defined.

Reviewer 2: Suggest "If either side of a relational operator is an expression containing only literal constants" to mirror the formulation in rule 1. Otherwise `T > (5+3)` does not match this rule.

Author: Unless we find something better than "expression containing only literal constants", that is 😅

Reviewer 2: Of course. But step 1 is to use a consistent formulation in all rules, to then update it in step 2. :-)

\end{lstlisting}
\end{nonnormative}

\subsection{Units of Literal Constants}\label{units-literal-constants}

> Literal \lstinline!Real! and \lstinline!Integer! constants are implicitly assumed
> to have \lstinline!unit = "1"! if they appear in expressions containing variables,
> parameters, or constants that have a non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string.
> The inputs of transcendental built-in functions such as \lstinline!sin()!,
> \lstinline!cos()!, \lstinline!exp()!, etc., should have a dimensionless unit
> (e.g., "1" or "rad") if they involve expressions containing variables,
> parameters, or constants that have a non-empty unit attribute string; their
> outputs are implicitly assumed to have unit "1" if they are called within
> expressions containing variables, parameters, or constants that have a non-empty
> \lstinline!unit! attribute string.

Reviewer: Let's begin by getting some of the boring stuff out of the way.

Please use sentence-based line breaking (also suggesting that unit string literals are formatted as inline code for consistency with the _Unit Expressions_ chapter):
```suggestion
Literal \lstinline!Real! and \lstinline!Integer! constants are implicitly assumed to have \lstinline!unit = "1"! if they appear in expressions containing variables, parameters, or constants that have a non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string.
The inputs of transcendental built-in functions such as \lstinline!sin()!, \lstinline!cos()!, \lstinline!exp()!, etc., should have a dimensionless unit (e.g., \lstinline!"1"! or \lstinline!"rad"!) if they involve expressions containing variables, parameters, or constants that have a non-empty unit attribute string; their outputs are implicitly assumed to have unit \lstinline!"1"! if they are called within expressions containing variables, parameters, or constants that have a non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string.
```

Reviewer 3: Note that dimensionless should be written symmetrically for input and output, since we have both `sin` (from "rad" to "1") and its inverse `asin` (from "1" to "rad").

However, there are two exceptions - sqrt (which have separate rules), and atan2.

Reviewer: (I suggest that we wait for @casella to get the sentence-based line breaking in place before we initiate further conversations attached to lines of code.)

Author: Reformatted to sentence-based line breaking in bdbea3b.

Author: > Note that dimensionless should be written symmetrically for input and output, since we have both `sin` (from "rad" to "1") and its inverse `asin` (from "1" to "rad").

See my comment [here](https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/issues/2127#issuecomment-1271723893): from the point of view of dimensional consistency checking, "1" and "rad" are basically the same, i.e. dimensionless. Also, on can write `sin(L/R)` where `L` and `R` have unit "m" and that is perfectly fine, the input of `sin()` doesn't necessarily need to have unit "rad". What is important is to get the _dimension_ right, not the unit.

> However, there are two exceptions - sqrt (which have separate rules)

Sqrt is not a transcendental function 😃 

> and atan2.

Here we probably need to specify that the two inputs of atan2 need to have the same unit (if they have any). As to the output, see above about "1" and "rad" being the same for dimensional consistency checking.

I wanted to keep the new text short, of course we could put in a detailed list of how each of the 13 functions defined in Section 3.7.3 should be handled, but that would probably be a bit pedantic.

Reviewer 3: > > Note that dimensionless should be written symmetrically for input and output, since we have both `sin` (from "rad" to "1") and its inverse `asin` (from "1" to "rad").
> 
> See my comment [here](https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/issues/2127#issuecomment-1271723893): from the point of view of dimensional consistency checking, "1" and "rad" are basically the same, i.e. dimensionless. Also, on can write `sin(L/R)` where `L` and `R` have unit "m" and that is perfectly fine, the input of `sin()` doesn't necessarily need to have unit "rad". What is important is to get the _dimension_ right, not the unit.

Marking the new line with proposal.

> > However, there are two exceptions - sqrt (which have separate rules)
> 
> Sqrt is not a transcendental function 😃

?

> > and atan2.
> 
> Here we probably need to specify that the two inputs of atan2 need to have the same unit (if they have any). 

I would say that 'The function atan2(y, x) is from a unit-checking perspective treated as atan(y/x).'

Author: OK, I'll do that. I'm still a bit confused about all these github collaborative work features, sorry about that...

> sqrt is not a transcendental function

Hans, the sentence started with "The inputs of transcendental built-in functions...". The `sqrt()` function is not a [transcendental function](https://www.britannica.com/science/transcendental-function), so the sentence does not apply to it.

> I would say that 'The function atan2(y, x) is from a unit-checking perspective treated as atan(y/x).'

Sounds good, will do that when restarting the conversation.

\begin{nonnormative}

> Rationale: unit attributes allow to check dimensional consistency of expressions
> and equations, as long as all the involved terms have a non-empty \lstinline!unit!
> attribute. Non-dimensional literal factors, e.g., \lstinline!2! in
> \lstinline!v = sqrt(2*g*h)! in physical laws involving quantities with units are
> always meant to be dimensionless, so they should be cosidered as such by giving
> them \lstinline!unit = "1"!. This allows to find out that, e.g., \lstinline!v = sqrt(2*h)!
> is dimensionally inconsistent (hence most likely wrong), because it has unit
> "m/s" on the LHS and unit "m0.5" on the RHS, which are not consistent.
> Without this rule, \lstinline!2! would have the default \lstinline!unit = ""!,
> of \lstinline!Real!, making it impossible to determine the RHS unit.
> 
> On the other hand, literal constants showing up in expressions containing only
> literal constants should be left with the default \lstinline!unit = ""!
> attribute, otherwise declarations such as \lstinline!Real L(unit = "m") = 2.0!,
> equations such as \lstinline!L = 2.0! and function calls such as
> \lstinline!temperature_ph(1e5, 293.15)! or \lstinline!temperature_ph(1e5, 273.15 + 20)!
> would be erroneously flagged as dimensionally inconsistent.
> 
> The rules involving built-in transcendental functions extend the scope of this
> concept to also allow determining that equations such as
> \lstinline!i = i0*exp(v/i0)! or \lstinline!i = v0*exp(i/i0)! are dimensionally
> inconsistent.

Reviewer: Same here (also writing out LHS and RHS as almost everywhere else in the document):
```suggestion
Rationale: unit attributes allow to check dimensional consistency of expressions and equations, as long as all the involved terms have a non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute. Non-dimensional literal factors, e.g., \lstinline!2! in \lstinline!v = sqrt(2*g*h)! in physical laws involving quantities with units are always meant to be dimensionless, so they should be cosidered as such by giving them \lstinline!unit = "1"!. This allows to find out that, e.g., \lstinline!v = sqrt(2*h)! is dimensionally inconsistent (hence most likely wrong), because it has unit \lstinline!"m/s"! on the left-hand side and unit \lstinline!"m0.5"! on the right-hand side, which are not consistent. Without this rule, \lstinline!2! would have the default \lstinline!unit = ""!, of \lstinline!Real!, making it impossible to determine the right-hand side unit.

On the other hand, literal constants showing up in expressions containing only literal constants should be left with the default \lstinline!unit = ""! attribute, otherwise declarations such as \lstinline!Real L(unit = "m") = 2.0!, equations such as \lstinline!L = 2.0! and function calls such as \lstinline!temperature_ph(1e5, 293.15)! or \lstinline!temperature_ph(1e5, 273.15 + 20)! would be erroneously flagged as dimensionally inconsistent.

The rules involving built-in transcendental functions extend the scope of this concept to also allow determining that equations such as \lstinline!i = i0*exp(v/i0)! or \lstinline!i = v0*exp(i/i0)! are dimensionally inconsistent.
```

Author: Wrote out LHS and RHS in eb116d7.

Reviewer: Nice.  Resolving.

\subsection{Units of Literal Constants}\label{units-literal-constants}

The following rules apply:

> - The result of `x + L`, `L + x`, `x - L`, `L - x`, `x*L`, `L*x`, `x/L`, where `x` is an expression with non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string `<s>` and `L` is an expression containing only literal constants, shall have the same \lstinline!unit! attribute string of `x`.

Reviewer 2: Maybe I'm off-base or too precise again, but I don't think *expressions* even have a `unit` attribute string -- only `Real` does (4.8.1).

Reviewer 3: We could write "real expression". Note that the literal can also be an integer literal, but the assumption is that both x and x+L (etc) are "real expressions".
Alternatively, we could view it as expressions having a unit - in general - but that may require more work.

Reviewer 4: > We could write "real expression".
What about arrays?

Reviewer 3: > > We could write "real expression".
> 
> What about arrays?

That's messier - let's focus on their scalar elements first. 

Usually, arrays are homogenous - i.e., all elements have the same unit - but sometimes they are not (especially when applying filtering to an array).

Note that you can write `Real x[2](unit={"m","m/s"})`, so you can create non-homogenous arrays - but it's not common.
(I believe we added support for that in Dymola in 2013.)

The following rules apply:
- The result of `x + L`, `L + x`, `x - L`, `L - x`, `x*L`, `L*x`, `x/L`, where `x` is an expression with non-empty \lstinline!unit! attribute string `<s>` and `L` is an expression containing only literal constants, shall have the same \lstinline!unit! attribute string of `x`.

> - The result of `L/x` shall the the \lstinline!unit! attribute string `1/(<s>)`.

Reviewer 2: The other part of that fix  (from [here](https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/pull/3266#discussion_r1018728122)) was omitted - "shall **have** the" - could you also commit that, Hans? :-)

Reviewer 3: Ok reluctantly done.
In general I don't want to commit so much directly, but I made an exception since it didn't build so we couldn't look at the result.

Reviewer 2: Thanks!

Reviewer 2: This conversation can be resolved (I don't have that button).
